Add a tutorial for creating a vehicle model using DTDL and translating that to Rust code (#66)
eclipse-ibeji/ibeji: docs/tutorials/vehicle_model/README.md

# Tutorial: Create a vehicle model with DTDL

- [Introduction](#introduction)

> - [1. Create a reference vehicle model with DTDL](#1-create-a-reference-vehicle-model-with-dtdl)

Reviewer: Please capitalize nouns, pronouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs in section titles (e.g. the section on this line should be "Create a Reference Vehicle Model with DTDL")

  - [1.1 DTDL Interfaces](#11-dtdl-interfaces)
  - [1.2 Create HVAC and HMI interfaces](#12-create-hvac-and-hmi-interfaces)
  - [1.3 DTDL DTMI ID](#13-dtdl-dtmi-id)
  - [1.4 DTDL properties](#14-dtdl-properties)
  - [1.5 DTDL commands](#15-dtdl-commands)
- [2. DTDL validation](#2-dtdl-validation)
- [3. Translating DTDL to code](#3-translating-dtdl-to-code)

## Introduction

> In this tutorial, you will learn how to create a vehicle model using [Digital Twins Definition Language (DTDL) version 3.0](https://azure.github.io/opendigitaltwins-dtdl/DTDL/v3/DTDL.v3.html), and build a corresponding Rust vehicle model. The focus will be on translating DTDL to a programming language, specifically Rust. While Rust is used here to be consistent with Ibeji's samples being in Rust, you can use any programming language.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, you will learn how to create a vehicle model using [Digital Twins Definition Language (DTDL) version 3.0](https://azure.github.io/opendigitaltwins-dtdl/DTDL/v3/DTDL.v3.html), and build a corresponding Rust vehicle model. The focus will be on translating DTDL to a programming language. While Rust is used here to be consistent with Ibeji's samples (which are in Rust), you can use any programming language.
```

This tutorial provides a basic understanding of DTDL in the context of our Ibeji samples, but it is not a comprehensive guide to DTDL. Specifically, it covers [interfaces](https://azure.github.io/opendigitaltwins-dtdl/DTDL/v3/DTDL.v3.html#interface), [commands](https://azure.github.io/opendigitaltwins-dtdl/DTDL/v3/DTDL.v3.html#command), [properties](https://azure.github.io/opendigitaltwins-dtdl/DTDL/v3/DTDL.v3.html#property)

Please refer to the [DTDL v3](https://azure.github.io/opendigitaltwins-dtdl/DTDL/v3/DTDL.v3.html) documentation for more information on DTDL.

>Note: Currently in Ibeji, DTDL is used as a reference representation of the vehicle hardware. It serves as a guide to manually construct the vehicle model in code. In the future, the vehicle model code should be generated from a DTDL file.

## 1. Create a reference vehicle model with DTDL

> In this section, you will be learning how to create a reference vehicle model with DTDL. DTDL is used to define a digital twin model of a vehicle, and its capabilities.

Reviewer: Try to use active language where possible. There's also an extraneous comma here:

```suggestion
In this section, you will learn how to create a reference vehicle model with DTDL. DTDL is used to define a digital twin model of a vehicle and its capabilities.

```

> Under the {repo-root-dir}/digital-twin-model/dtdl directory, contains sample DTDL files to describe our sample in-vehicle digital twin model. Our sample in-vehicle digital twin model consists of an airbag seat massager, camera, human machine interface (HMI), HVAC, and an on-board diagnostics (OBD).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `{repo-root-dir}/digital-twin-model/dtdl` directory contains sample DTDL files which describe our sample in-vehicle digital twin model. This model consists of an airbag seat massager; camera; human machine interface (HMI); heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) system; and an on-board diagnostics (OBD).

```

To simplify, this tutorial will guide you in creating a digital twin vehicle model with HVAC and HMI systems.

### 1.1 DTDL interfaces

>[DTDL v3 Interface:](https://azure.github.io/opendigitaltwins-dtdl/DTDL/v3/DTDL.v3.html#interface) "An Interface describes the contents (Commands, Components, Properties, Relationships, and Telemetries) of any digital twin".

> Each sample DTDL file in the {repo-root-dir}/digital-twin-model/dtdl directory, and begins with an interface at the top level.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each sample DTDL file in the `{repo-root-dir}/digital-twin-model/dtdl` directory begins with an interface at the top level.

```

> Each sample DTDL file in the {repo-root-dir}/digital-twin-model/dtdl directory, and begins with an interface at the top level.

Author: I've removed the `and` after the comma. Hopefully this makes more sense now.

>Tip: A suggested strategy for creating your in-vehicle digital twin model is to first determine the components and vehicle characteristics you want to include in your common vehicle, followed by deciding the level of granularity you need for your in-vehicle digital twin model.
>

> >For example, in our samples, we categorize HVAC and OBD separately. The `hvac.json` DTDL file contains all HVAC-related elements, while the `obd.json` DTDL file encompasses all OBD-related components.

Reviewer: It might be cleaner to choose the same verb for both clauses here: either "contains" or "encompasses"

### 1.3 DTDL DTMI ID

>[Digital Twin Model Identifer (DTMI):](https://azure.github.io/opendigitaltwins-dtdl/DTDL/v3/DTDL.v3.html#additional-concerns) "All elements in digital twin models must have an identifier that is a digital twin model identifier (DTMI). This includes Interfaces, Properties, Telemetries, Commands, Relationships, Components, complex schema objects, etc. This does not require that every model element have an explicit identifier, but any identifier assigned to a model element by a digital twin processor must follow this identifier format".

The value for the `@id` field must conform to the DTMI format. A DTMI consists of three parts: scheme, path, and version. They are arranged in the format: `<scheme>:<path>;<version>`, with a colon separating the scheme and path, and a semicolon dividing the path and version. A DTMI must be unique. Please reference the [Digital Twin Mode Identifier](https://azure.github.io/opendigitaltwins-dtdl/DTDL/v3/DTDL.v3.html#digital-twin-model-identifier) section of the DTDL document to learn more about DTMI.

> The suggested approach for your creating a [DTMI](https://azure.github.io/opendigitaltwins-dtdl/DTDL/v3/DTDL.v3.html#digital-twin-model-identifier): "For any definition that is the property of an organization with a registered domain name, a suggested approach to generating identifiers is to use the reversed order of domain segments as initial path segments, followed by further segments that are expected to be collectively unique among definitions within the domain. For example, dtmi:com:fabrikam:industrialProducts:airQualitySensor;1".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following is the suggested approach for creating a [DTMI](https://azure.github.io/opendigitaltwins-dtdl/DTDL/v3/DTDL.v3.html#digital-twin-model-identifier):

>For any definition that is the property of an organization with a registered domain name, a suggested approach to generating identifiers is to use the reversed order of domain segments as initial path segments, followed by further segments that are expected to be collectively unique among definitions within the domain. For example, `dtmi:com:fabrikam:industrialProducts:airQualitySensor;1`.

```

> In step 2 of [1.2 Create HVAC and HMI interfaces](#12-create-hvac-and-hmi-interfaces), the DTMI for your HVAC system is `dtmi:sdv:HVAC;1` and `dtmi:sdv:HMI;1` for your HMI. The domain is `sdv` and under this domain we have an `HVAC` and an `HMI` interface. These two DTMIs conforms to the DTDL v3 spec.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In step 2 of [1.2 Create HVAC and HMI interfaces](#12-create-hvac-and-hmi-interfaces), the DTMI for your HVAC system is `dtmi:sdv:HVAC;1` and the DTMI for your HMI is `dtmi:sdv:HMI;1`. The domain is `sdv` and under this domain we have an `HVAC` and an `HMI` interface. These two DTMIs conform to the DTDL v3 spec.

```

Consider our HVAC digital twin that you created in [1.2 Create HVAC and HMI interfaces](#12-create-hvac-and-hmi-interfaces).

To add properties to the HVAC digital twin model, replace the existing content of `hvac.json` with the following:

```json
[
  {
    "@context": ["dtmi:dtdl:context;3"],
    "@type": "Interface",
    "@id": "dtmi:sdv:HVAC;1",
    "description": "Heat, Ventilation and Air Conditioning",
    "contents": [
      {
          "@type": "Property",
          "@id": "dtmi:sdv:HVAC:AmbientAirTemperature;1",
          "name": "AmbientAirTemperature",
          "description": "The immediate surroundings' air temperature (in Fahrenheit).",
          "schema": "integer"
        },
        {
          "@type": "Property",
          "@id": "dtmi:sdv:HVAC:IsAirConditioningActive;1",
          "name": "IsAirConditioningActive",
          "description": "Is air conditioning active?",
          "schema": "boolean"
        }
    ]
  }
]
```

This introduces two signals to our HVAC system: ambient air temperature and air conditioning status. Both signals have `@id` values starting with `dtmi:sdv:HVAC`, signifying they belong to the sdv domain and HVAC interface.

> Please see [Property](https://azure.github.io/opendigitaltwins-dtdl/DTDL/v3/DTDL.v3#property) for more information on the property type and the descriptions of each field. Similar to the DTDL interface type, Ibeji mandates the description field. Despite DTDL v3 spec considering the @id field for properties as optional, Ibeji requires it. This helps in translating your DTDL files to code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please see [Property](https://azure.github.io/opendigitaltwins-dtdl/DTDL/v3/DTDL.v3#property) for more information on the property type and the descriptions of each field. Similar to the DTDL interface type, Ibeji mandates the description field. Despite DTDL v3 spec considering the `@id` field for properties as optional, Ibeji requires it. This helps in translating your DTDL files to code.

```

The `ShowNotification` is not a property. This is because properties reflect the state of a digital twin, while `ShowNotification` is an action that can be performed on this HMI digital twin model which qualifies as a command.

Please see [Command](https://azure.github.io/opendigitaltwins-dtdl/DTDL/v3/DTDL.v3#command) for more information on the command type and the descriptions of each field. Similar to the DTDL interface type, Ibeji mandates the description field. Despite DTDL v3 spec considering the `@id` field for commands as optional, Ibeji requires it. This helps in translating your DTDL files to code.

## 2. DTDL validation

Ensure your digital twin models adhere to the [DTDL v3 spec](https://azure.github.io/opendigitaltwins-dtdl/DTDL/v3/DTDL.v3) before translating your digital twin models to code. Use Ibeji's [DTDL tools](https://github.com/eclipse-ibeji/ibeji/blob/main/dtdl-tools/README.md) to validate your DTDL files.

## 3. Translating DTDL to code

You have built a basic reference digital twin model of a vehicle with an HVAC system and HMI using DTDL. In this section, you will use convert this model into Rust code.

1. Create a Rust file called `sdv_v1.rs`

> 1. Reference the `hmi.json` DTDL file that you have created in  [1.5 DTDL commands](#15-dtdl-commands).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Reference the `hmi.json` DTDL file that you have created in [1.5 DTDL commands](#15-dtdl-commands).

```

> 1. Copy the following contents to the `sdv_v1.rs`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Copy the following contents to the `sdv_v1.rs`:

```

```rust
// Copyright (c) Microsoft Corporation.
// Licensed under the MIT license.
// SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT

// Note: In the future this code should be generated from a DTDL spec.

pub mod hmi {
    pub mod show_notification {
        pub const ID: &str = "dtmi:sdv:HMI:ShowNotification;1";
        pub const NAME: &str = "Show Notification";
        pub const DESCRIPTION: &str = "Show a notification on the HMI.";
        pub mod request {
            pub const ID: &str = "dtmi:sdv:HMI:ShowNotification::request;1";
            pub const NAME: &str = "Notification";
            pub const DESCRIPTION: &str = "The notification to show on the HMI.";
            pub type TYPE = String;
        }
        pub mod response {
            pub const ID: &str = "dtmi:sdv:HMI:ShowNotification::response;1";
        }
    }

> }

Reviewer: You're missing the closing ` ``` ` for this code block

1. Reference the `hvac.json` DTDL file that you have created in [1.5 DTDL properties](#15-dtdl-properties)

> 1. Copy the following contents to the `sdv_v1.rs` Rust file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Copy the following contents to the `sdv_v1.rs` Rust file:

```

```rust
pub mod hvac {
    pub mod ambient_air_temperature {
        pub const ID: &str = "dtmi:sdv:HVAC:AmbientAirTemperature;1";
        pub const NAME: &str = "AmbientAirTemperature";
        pub const DESCRIPTION: &str = "The immediate surroundings air temperature (in Fahrenheit).";
        pub type TYPE = i32;
    }

    pub mod is_air_conditioning_active {
        pub const ID: &str = "dtmi:sdv:HVAC:IsAirConditioningActive;1";
        pub const NAME: &str = "IsAirConditioningActive";
        pub const DESCRIPTION: &str = "Is air conditioning active?";
        pub type TYPE = bool;
    }
}
```

This `sdv_v1.rs` is a representation of the vehicle DTDL model with an HMI and an HVAC in code.

> In [1.2 Create HVAC and HMI interfaces](#12-create-hvac-and-hmi-interfaces), the `@id` field for the HMI and HVAC digital twin interfaces are `dtmi:sdv:HMI;1` and `dtmi:sdv:HVAC;1`, respectively. These DTMIs are constructed in the sdv_v1.rs file, which we created in step 2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In [1.2 Create HVAC and HMI interfaces](#12-create-hvac-and-hmi-interfaces), the `@id` field for the HMI and HVAC digital twin interfaces are `dtmi:sdv:HMI;1` and `dtmi:sdv:HVAC;1`, respectively. These DTMIs are constructed in the `sdv_v1.rs` file, which we created in step 2.

```

> The sdv_v1.rs file contains two main modules: `hmi` and `hvac`. The HMI module constructs the interface for `dtmi:sdv:HMI;1`, and the hvac module constructs the interface for `dtmi:sdv:HVAC;1`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `sdv_v1.rs` file contains two main modules: `hmi` and `hvac`. The `hmi` module constructs the interface for `dtmi:sdv:HMI;1`, and the `hvac` module constructs the interface for `dtmi:sdv:HVAC;1`.

```

> In the HMI module, there is a `show_notification` submodule that represents the ShowNotification command in DTDL. It has an ID, NAME, and DESCRIPTION constant, which correspond to the `@id`, `name`, and `description` fields in the `hmi.json` DTDL file. The request and response submodules represent the request and response of the command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the `hmi` module, there is a `show_notification` submodule that represents the `ShowNotification` command in DTDL. It has an `ID`, `NAME`, and `DESCRIPTION` constant, which correspond to the `@id`, `name`, and `description` fields in the `hmi.json` DTDL file. The request and response submodules represent the request and response of the command.

```

> Similarly, in the HVAC module, there are two submodules: ambient_air_temperature and is_air_conditioning_active. These represent the `AmbientAirTemperature` and `IsAirConditioningActive` properties in the `hvac.json` DTDL. Each submodule has an ID, NAME, DESCRIPTION, and TYPE constant, which correspond to the `@id`, `name`, `description`, and `schema` fields in DTDL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly, in the `hvac` module, there are two submodules: `ambient_air_temperature` and `is_air_conditioning_active`. These represent the `AmbientAirTemperature` and `IsAirConditioningActive` properties in the `hvac.json` DTDL. Each submodule has an `ID`, `NAME`, `DESCRIPTION`, and `TYPE` constant, which correspond to the `@id`, `name`, `description`, and `schema` fields in DTDL.

```

> This Rust code is a way to use a DTDL model in a Rust program, with each DTDL element represented as a Rust module,constant, or type. You can translate a DTDL model into other programming languages. Use the `@id` fields in your DTDL model as guidance to code your vehicle model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This Rust code is a way to use a DTDL model in a Rust program, with each DTDL element represented as a Rust module, constant, or type. You can translate a DTDL model into other programming languages. Use the `@id` fields in your DTDL model as guidance to code your vehicle model.

```

> This Rust code is a way to use a DTDL model in a Rust program, with each DTDL element represented as a Rust module,constant, or type. You can translate a DTDL model into other programming languages. Use the `@id` fields in your DTDL model as guidance to code your vehicle model.

Reviewer 2: Consider adding a sentence about how this code can be used in providers and consumers, and that it can server as constants to standardize the values used from both the provider and consumer when communicating with Ibeji.

Author: I've included a sentence regarding that this code can be used in providers and consumers. The next tutorial should show how this code can be used in providers and consumers.
